# Technologies

This has been primarily written in d3.js, but Bootstrap has also been used for the infobox popovers (and Bootstrap requires jQuery).

libraries:
 * lodash - utility functions
 * d3.promise.js - adds promises to d3's file reading functions
 * bootstrap - used for the popover functionality
 * jquery - required for bootstrap.
 * simple-statistics - for the ckmeans clustering algorithm
 * loglevel - for logging

# Design patterns

The d3 components have been written using Mike Bostock's [reusable charts pattern](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/chart/). The non-d3 objects have been written using closure functions with getters and setters i.e.:

	GENEMAP.Person = function(name, age) {
	  var my = {};

	  var privateFn = function() { ... }

	  my.publicFn = function(a, b, c) { ...}

	  my.age = function(value) {
		  if (!arguments.length) return age;
		  age = value;
		  return my;
	  }

	  return my;	  
	}

This was to keep them similar to the d3 objects. If the number of these objects increase it is recommended to switch using a prototype constructor pattern to avoid the overhead of duplicated function objects.

I've tried to use a global module `var GENEMAP = GENEMAP || {};` and attached all the object to this module but I've not used the module pattern to isolate the dependencies of each object. This is something that may be necessary as the codebase grows.


# Layout

The map is drawn within a contained element, the id of which has to be passed to the .draw() method.

The basic constructed layout is

- The menu markup (menu_bar.js), a `<div>` containing the buttons to control the map
- The SVG container (genemap.js), the map creates its own SVG element to contain the drawing
  - zoom window (genemap.js) - This is a wrapper that has the d3 zoom functionality added to it
    - outline (genemap.js) - This draws the document outline and sets the backgorund color
    - cell containers (chromosome_cell.js) - A list of cell cotnainers to contain each of the chromosomes
    - gene-annotations (gene_annotations.js) - A container for all the gene annotations
    - qtl-annotations (qtl_annotations.js) - A container for all the QTL annotations
    - chromosome (chromosome.js) - A container for the chromosome image
    - chromosome-label (chromosome_cell.js) - A container for the chromosome label


The chromosome container contents is generated by the chromosome.js code and has the following structure:

	g.chromosome - a group for each chromosome defined
		defs
			mask - the mask used for this chromosome
		text - the top label of the chromosome
		background - sets the white background
		bands-container - contains the bands and uses the mask
			bands - a collection of colored rectangular bands
		outline - the black outline to the chromosome

The bands themselves are drawn as a stack of rectangles, to achieve the rounded corners a rounded rectangle mask is defined and applied to the bands container. 
To get the black outline another rounded rectangle is drawn over the top of the bands container.
The background is needed to prevent any annotation lines showing through the middle of the chromosome where there are no bands.

Even though the chromosomes and annotations share the same data I decided to draw them using separate components to simplify the individual components.

# Data processing

The data is read from one or two XML files.
It is then processed by the processor, this alters the colors and combines the data into a single genome object.

	genome
		chromosomes
			annotations
				genes
				qtls
			bands
				
#Layout generation

The layout functions in `auto_layout.js`, `gene_annotation_layout.js` and `gene_bands_layout.js` decorate the genome object
 with computed objects specifying how the chromosome bands and annotations should be displayed.
 
	genome
	    cellLayout
		chromosomes
            cell
		    layout
		        annotationClusters
		        annotationDisplayClusters
		        annotationNodes
		        
		        geneBandClusters
		        geneBandDisplayClusters
		        geneBandNodeso
		        
		        
## Global Layout
`cellLayout` contains the global properties for the whole layout.
`chromosome.cell` contains the positioning information for a single chromsome cell.

The layout of the cell containers and the elements within them is control by the layout decorator (auto_layout.js).
This 'decorates' the genome data object with some layout properties that are used by the cell containers to position the cells themselves and their contents.

The position of each of the cells is calculated as follows:

 - The number of cells is calculated (number of rows and columns) based on the number of chromosomes and the number of chromosomes to put on each row.
 - Once the number of rows and columns is calculated the space (excluding the margin) is divided into these cells. This means all chromosomes will be initially visible.

The position and size of the gene-annotations, qtl-annotations, chromosome and chromosome label within the cell is calculated by:

 - The top and bottom margins and the height of the cell label is calculated as a percentage of the cell's height, the rest of the cell's height is given to the chromosome.
 - The chromosome's width is then calculated based on the aspect ratio of the chromosome. The left and right margins are calculated as a percentage of the width, the rest of the space is given to the QTL annotations (to the left of the chromosome) and the gene-annotations (to the right of the chromosome) equally.

## Individual annotation layout
`chromsome.layout` contains the computed layout for individual gene bands and annotations. 

For xxx = annotation or geneBand:

- `xxxClusters` are groups of several genes which have been merged to make it easier to display them.
- `xxxDisplayClusters` are the clusters currently being displayed (may differ from `Clusters` if a clusters has been expanded).
- `xxxNodes` contain the actual positioning and colouring information (generated by labella in the case of gene annotations).

#infobox

The infoboxes are the popovers that appear when the annotations are clicked. They are twitter bootstrap popovers that are triggered on click (as opposed to hover).
 To dismiss them when something else is clicked there is a click handler on the html element that clears all popovers.

# logging

Logging is handled by the loglevel library:

    log.error( 'An error message' );
    
Log level can be set in the console window with `setLevel()` and will be persisted between sessions if the second argument is true.
In index.html, `log.setDefaultLevel("info")` applies only if a previously persisted log level is not found.

# icons
Icons come from the O-Collection.
They are downloaded in svg form, then converted to png of the correct size using inkscape. E.g:

    & 'C:\Program Files\Inkscape\inkscape.exe' --export-png=assets\img\information.png --export-width=36 --export-height=36 assets\svg\information.svg

The colours can be edited manually in the svg files:

    gray: #444444
    blue: #21a2ef
    
Both svg and png files are committed in the repository.


# namespaced bootstrap

To avoid having to use bootstrap's css on the entire site I've generated a customised version of the bootstrap css based on the answer to a question on [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/13966259/how-to-namespace-twitter-bootstrap-so-styles-dont-conflict).

This was compiled using [WinLess](http://winless.org/) although any Less compiler should work.

# npm and bower

To manage the development dependencies npm is used and bower is used for the libraries used at runtime. As this is a only a browser based component there should be no non-development dependencies installed by npm.

After checking out a copy of the source code you will need to run in the `GeneMap` directory:

    npm install
    bower install

This should automatically install all the dependancies.

# gulp

To automate development tasks `gulp` is used. This should be installed when `npm install` is run. To get a list of all the tasks run the `gulp` command in the `GeneMap` direcotry.

The main development tasks are:
 * *serve-dev* start the development server on port 8080
 * *optimise* build the combined & minified JavaScript and CSS files placing them into the `dist` folder
 * *watch* watches for changes to the .less files and automatically re-compiles the temporary .css files in the `.tmp` directory.
 * *inject* injects the dependencies into the index.html file (from bower, src/js and .tmp/css), also re-compiles all the CSS and SVG files.

 All of these configurations are controlled by the `gulpfile.js` and `gulp.config.js` files in the `GeneMap` directory.

# tests

There are a number of automated tests written in Jasmine. 
These tests aren't comprehensive but do cover several areas (particularly the areas that don't directly interact with the DOM). 
To run the tests run the `gulp serve-dev` process and navigate to http://localhost:8080/SpecRunner.html.
